Refactor Pipelines / Community pipelines and add better explanations. (#257)
huggingface/diffusers: src/diffusers/pipelines/README.md

# 🧨 Diffusers Pipelines

> Pipelines provide a simply way to run state-of-the-art difffusion models in inference.

Reviewer: Typo

```suggestion
Pipelines provide a simple way to run state-of-the-art diffusion models in inference.
```

> Most diffusion systems consits of multiple independently-trained models and highly adaptable scheduler 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most diffusion systems consist of multiple independently-trained models and highly adaptable scheduler 
```

components - all of which are needed to have a functioning end-to-end diffusion system.

As an example, [Stable Diffusion](https://huggingface.co/blog/stable_diffusion) has three indepently trained models:
- [Autoencoder](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/blob/5cbed8e0d157f65d3ddc2420dfd09f2df630e978/src/diffusers/models/vae.py#L392)
- [Conditional Unet](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/blob/5cbed8e0d157f65d3ddc2420dfd09f2df630e978/src/diffusers/models/unet_2d_condition.py#L12)
- [CLIP text encoder](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/v4.21.2/en/model_doc/clip#transformers.CLIPTextModel)
- a scheduler component, [scheduler](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/blob/main/src/diffusers/schedulers/scheduling_pndm.py), 
- a [CLIPFeatureExtractor](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/v4.21.2/en/model_doc/clip#transformers.CLIPFeatureExtractor),
- as well as a [safety checker](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/blob/main/src/diffusers/pipelines/stable_diffusion/safety_checker.py).

> All of these components are necessary to run stable diffusion in inference even thought they were trained 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All of these components are necessary to run stable diffusion in inference even though they were trained 
```

or created independently from each other.

To that end, we strive to offer all open-sourced, state-of-the-art diffusion system under a unified API. 
More specifically, we strive to provide pipelines that
- 1. can load the officially published weights and yield 1-to-1 the same outputs as the original implemetation according to the corresponding paper (*e.g.* [LatentDiffusionPipeline](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/tree/main/src/diffusers/pipelines/latent_diffusion), uses the officially released weights of [High-Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Models](https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.10752)),
- 2. have a simple user interface to run the model in inference (see the [Pipelines API](#pipelines-api) section), 
- 3. are easy to understand with code that is self-explanatory and be can read along-side the official paper (see [Pipelines summary](#pipelines-summary)),
- 4. can easily be contributed by the community (see the [Contribution](#contribution) section).

> **Note** that pipelines do and should not offer any training functionality. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note** that pipelines do not (and should not) offer any training functionality. 
```

Or just get rid of the parenthesis.

| [score_sde_vp](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/blob/main/src/diffusers/pipelines/score_sde_ve) | []() | Unconditional Image Generation | 
| [stable_diffusion](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/blob/main/src/diffusers/pipelines/stable_diffusion) | []() | Text-to-Image Generation | [![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/huggingface/notebooks/blob/main/diffusers/training_example.ipynb)
|  | []() | Image-to-Image Translation | [![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/huggingface/notebooks/blob/main/diffusers/training_example.ipynb)
|  | []() | Image In-Painting | [![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/huggingface/notebooks/blob/main/diffusers/training_example.ipynb)
| [stochatic_karras_ve](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/blob/main/src/diffusers/pipelines/stochatic_karras_ve) | []() | Unconditional Image Generation | 

> **Note**: Many pipelines give a very simple examples of how to play around with the diffusion systems as present in the corresponding paper. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note**: Many pipelines provide very simple examples of how to play around with the diffusion systems as described in the corresponding papers. 
```

> However, this is just an example and almost all pipelines can be adapted to use different scheduler components or even different model componets. Some examples are shown in the [Examples](#examples) below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, most of them can be adapted to use different scheduler components or even different model components. Some pipeline examples are shown in the [Examples](#examples) below.
```

## Pipelines API

> Diffusion models often consists of multiple independently trained models or created componets. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Diffusion models often consist of multiple independently-trained models or other previously existing components. 
```

"./stable-diffusion". To correctly retrieve which models and components should be loaded one has to provide a `model_index.json` file, *e.g.* [CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4/model_index.json](https://huggingface.co/CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4/blob/main/model_index.json), which defines all components that should be 
loaded into the pipelines. More specifically, for each model/component one needs to define the format `<name>: ["<library>", "<class name>"]`. `<name>` is the attribute name given to the loaded instance of `<class name>` which can be found in the library or pipeline folder called `"<library>"`.
- [`save_pretrained`](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/blob/5cbed8e0d157f65d3ddc2420dfd09f2df630e978/src/diffusers/pipeline_utils.py#L90) that accepts a local path, *e.g.* `./stable-diffusion` under which all models/components of the pipeline will be saved. For each component/model a folder is created inside the local path that is named after the given attribute name, *e.g.* `./stable_diffusion/unet`. 

> In additon, a `model_index.json` file is created at the root of the local path, *e.g.* `./stable_diffusion/model_index.json` so that the complete pipeline can again be instantiated 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, a `model_index.json` file is created at the root of the local path, *e.g.* `./stable_diffusion/model_index.json` so that the complete pipeline can again be instantiated 
```

from the local path.
- [`to`](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/blob/5cbed8e0d157f65d3ddc2420dfd09f2df630e978/src/diffusers/pipeline_utils.py#L118) which accepts a `string` or `torch.device` to move all models that are of type `torch.nn.Module` to the passed device. The behavior is fully analogous to [PyTorch's `to` method](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/generated/torch.nn.Module.html#torch.nn.Module.to).

> - [`__call__`] method to use the pipeline in inference. The `__call__` defines infenence logic of the pipeline and should ideally encompass all parts from pre-processing to fowarding tensors to the different models and scheduler components as well as post-processing. The API of the `__call__` method can strongly vary from pipeline to pipeline. *E.g.* a text-to-image pipeline, such as [`StableDiffusionPipeline`](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/blob/main/src/diffusers/pipelines/stable_diffusion/pipeline_stable_diffusion.py) should accept among other things the text prompt to generate the image. A pure image generation pipeline, such as [DDPMPipeline](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/tree/main/src/diffusers/pipelines/ddpm) on the other hand can be run without providing any inputs. To better understand what inputs can be adapted for 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`__call__`] method to use the pipeline in inference. `__call__` defines inference logic of the pipeline and should ideally encompass all aspects of it, from pre-processing to forwarding tensors to the different models and schedulers, as well as post-processing. The API of the `__call__` method can strongly vary from pipeline to pipeline. *E.g.* a text-to-image pipeline, such as [`StableDiffusionPipeline`](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/blob/main/src/diffusers/pipelines/stable_diffusion/pipeline_stable_diffusion.py) should accept among other things the text prompt to generate the image. A pure image generation pipeline, such as [DDPMPipeline](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/tree/main/src/diffusers/pipelines/ddpm) on the other hand can be run without providing any inputs. To better understand what inputs can be adapted for 
```

- **Self-contained**: A pipeline shall be as self-contained as possible. More specifically, this means that all functionality should be either directly defined in the pipeline file iteslf, should be inherited from (and only from) the [`DiffusionPipeline` class](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/blob/5cbed8e0d157f65d3ddc2420dfd09f2df630e978/src/diffusers/pipeline_utils.py#L56) or be directly attached to the model and scheduler components of the pipeline. 
- **Easy-to-use**: Pipelines should be extremely easy to use - one should be able to load the pipeline and 
use it for its designated task, *e.g.* text-to-image generation, in just a couple of lines of code. Most 
logic including pre-processing, an unrolled diffusion loop, and post-processing should all happen inside the `__call__` method.
- **Easy-to-tweak**: Certain pipelines will not be able to handle all use cases and tasks that you might like them to. If you want to use a certain pipeline for a specific use case that is not yet supported, you might have to copy the pipeline file and tweak the code to your needs.

> We try to make the pipeline code as readable as possible so that each part from pre-processing to diffusing to post-processing can easily be adapted. If you would like the community to benefit from your customized pipeline, we would ❤️  to see a contribution to our [community-examples](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/tree/main/examples/commmunity). If however you feel like an important pipeline is missing that deserves to be among the official pipelines in your opinion, a contribution to the [official pipeplines](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/blob/main/src/diffusers/pipelines) would be even better 🤗.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We try to make the pipeline code as readable as possible so that each part from pre-processing to diffusing to post-processing can easily be adapted. If you would like the community to benefit from your customized pipeline, we would ❤️  to see a contribution to our [community-examples](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/tree/main/examples/commmunity). If you feel that an important pipeline should be part of the official pipelines but isn't, a contribution to the [official pipelines](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/blob/main/src/diffusers/pipelines) would be even better 🤗.
```

> - **One-purpose-only**: Pipelines should be used for one task and one task only. Even two tasks are from a modeling point of view very similar, *e.g.* image2image translation and in painting, pipelines shall be used for one task only to keep them *easy-to-tweak* and *readable*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **One-purpose-only**: Pipelines should be used for one task and one task only. Even if two tasks are very similar from a modeling point of view, *e.g.* image2image translation and in-painting, pipelines shall be used for one task only to keep them *easy-to-tweak* and *readable*.
```

## Examples

### Image-to-Image text-guided generation with Stable Diffusion

The `image_to_image.py` script implements `StableDiffusionImg2ImgPipeline`. It lets you pass a text prompt and an initial image to condition the generation of new images. This example also showcases how you can write custom diffusion pipelines using `diffusers`!

```python
from torch import autocast
import requests
from PIL import Image
from io import BytesIO

> from image_to_image import StableDiffusionImg2ImgPipeline, preprocess

Reviewer: Shouldn't this be `from diffusers.pipeline import StableDiffusionInPaintPipeline`? Perhaps we should also rename `preprocess` to something like `preprocess_for_img2img_input` (we need to come up with something better), and export the symbol in at least `pipelines/stable_diffusion/__init__.py`.

In addition, shouldn't this example become the contents of `examples/inference/image_to_image.py`? Currently the file is empty except for a single line that imports the pipeline.

Author: `examples/inference` should be fully deprecated - also ideally the preprocess function is not called outside of the pipeline but only inside the pipeline

response = requests.get(url)
init_image = Image.open(BytesIO(response.content)).convert("RGB")
init_image = init_image.resize((768, 512))
init_image = preprocess(init_image)

prompt = "A fantasy landscape, trending on artstation"

with autocast("cuda"):
    images = pipe(prompt=prompt, init_image=init_image, strength=0.75, guidance_scale=7.5)["sample"]

images[0].save("fantasy_landscape.png")
```
You can also run this example on colab [![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/patil-suraj/Notebooks/blob/master/image_2_image_using_diffusers.ipynb)

### Tweak prompts reusing seeds and latents

You can generate your own latents to reproduce results, or tweak your prompt on a specific result you liked. [This notebook](stable-diffusion-seeds.ipynb) shows how to do it step by step. You can also run it in Google Colab [![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/pcuenca/diffusers-examples/blob/main/notebooks/stable-diffusion-seeds.ipynb).

### In-painting using Stable Diffusion

> The `inpainting.py` script implements `StableDiffusionInpaintingPipeline`. This script lets you edit specific parts of an image by providing a mask and text prompt.

Reviewer: Wasn't it renamed to `StableDiffusionInpaintPipeline`? See https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/pull/257/files#diff-39d36ab1e622684e35fe6971c12fb44e24756bdc383aba3d7f6e3b1625bdaafcR40

```python
from io import BytesIO

from torch import autocast
import requests
import PIL

> from inpainting import StableDiffusionInpaintingPipeline

Reviewer: Shouldn't this be `from diffusers.pipeline import StableDiffusionInPaintPipeline` ?

Also, shouldn't this example become the contents of `examples/inference/inpainting.py`? Currently the file is empty except for a single line that creates a new name for the symbol.

components - all of which are needed to have a functioning end-to-end diffusion system.

As an example, [Stable Diffusion](https://huggingface.co/blog/stable_diffusion) has three indepently trained models:
- [Autoencoder](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/blob/5cbed8e0d157f65d3ddc2420dfd09f2df630e978/src/diffusers/models/vae.py#L392)
- [Conditional Unet](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/blob/5cbed8e0d157f65d3ddc2420dfd09f2df630e978/src/diffusers/models/unet_2d_condition.py#L12)
- [CLIP text encoder](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/v4.21.2/en/model_doc/clip#transformers.CLIPTextModel)
- a scheduler component, [scheduler](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/blob/main/src/diffusers/schedulers/scheduling_pndm.py), 
- a [CLIPFeatureExtractor](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/v4.21.2/en/model_doc/clip#transformers.CLIPFeatureExtractor),
- as well as a [safety checker](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/blob/main/src/diffusers/pipelines/stable_diffusion/safety_checker.py).
All of these components are necessary to run stable diffusion in inference even though they were trained 
or created independently from each other.

> To that end, we strive to offer all open-sourced, state-of-the-art diffusion system under a unified API. 

Reviewer 2: Awesome writeup, thank you!

More specifically, we strive to provide pipelines that
- 1. can load the officially published weights and yield 1-to-1 the same outputs as the original implemetation according to the corresponding paper (*e.g.* [LatentDiffusionPipeline](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/tree/main/src/diffusers/pipelines/latent_diffusion), uses the officially released weights of [High-Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Models](https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.10752)),
- 2. have a simple user interface to run the model in inference (see the [Pipelines API](#pipelines-api) section), 

> - 3. are easy to understand with code that is self-explanatory and be can read along-side the official paper (see [Pipelines summary](#pipelines-summary)),

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- 3. are easy to understand with code that is self-explanatory and can be read along-side the official paper (see [Pipelines summary](#pipelines-summary)),
```

However, most of them can be adapted to use different scheduler components or even different model components. Some pipeline examples are shown in the [Examples](#examples) below.

## Pipelines API

Diffusion models often consist of multiple independently-trained models or other previously existing components. 

Each model has been trained indepently on a different task and the scheduler can easily be swapped out against another scheduler. 
During inference, we however want to be able to easily load all components and use them in inference - even if one component, *e.g.* CLIP's text encoder, originates from a different library, such as [Transformers](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers). To that end, all pipelines provide the following functionality:

- [`from_pretrained` method](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/blob/5cbed8e0d157f65d3ddc2420dfd09f2df630e978/src/diffusers/pipeline_utils.py#L139) that accepts a Hugging Face Hub repository id, *e.g.* [CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4](https://huggingface.co/CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4) or a path to a local directory, *e.g.*

> "./stable-diffusion". To correctly retrieve which models and components should be loaded one has to provide a `model_index.json` file, *e.g.* [CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4/model_index.json](https://huggingface.co/CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4/blob/main/model_index.json), which defines all components that should be 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
"./stable-diffusion". To correctly retrieve which models and components should be loaded, one has to provide a `model_index.json` file, *e.g.* [CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4/model_index.json](https://huggingface.co/CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4/blob/main/model_index.json), which defines all components that should be 
```

- **Self-contained**: A pipeline shall be as self-contained as possible. More specifically, this means that all functionality should be either directly defined in the pipeline file iteslf, should be inherited from (and only from) the [`DiffusionPipeline` class](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/blob/5cbed8e0d157f65d3ddc2420dfd09f2df630e978/src/diffusers/pipeline_utils.py#L56) or be directly attached to the model and scheduler components of the pipeline. 
- **Easy-to-use**: Pipelines should be extremely easy to use - one should be able to load the pipeline and 
use it for its designated task, *e.g.* text-to-image generation, in just a couple of lines of code. Most 
logic including pre-processing, an unrolled diffusion loop, and post-processing should all happen inside the `__call__` method.
- **Easy-to-tweak**: Certain pipelines will not be able to handle all use cases and tasks that you might like them to. If you want to use a certain pipeline for a specific use case that is not yet supported, you might have to copy the pipeline file and tweak the code to your needs.

> We try to make the pipeline code as readable as possible so that each part from pre-processing to diffusing to post-processing can easily be adapted. If you would like the community to benefit from your customized pipeline, we would   to see a contribution to our [community-examples](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/tree/main/examples/commmunity). If you feel that an important pipeline should be part of the official pipelines but isn't, a contribution to the [official pipelines](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/blob/main/src/diffusers/pipelines) would be even better .

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We try to make the pipeline code as readable as possible so that each part from pre-processing to diffusing to post-processing can easily be adapted. If you would like the community to benefit from your customized pipeline, we would  love to see a contribution to our [community-examples](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/tree/main/examples/commmunity). If you feel that an important pipeline should be part of the official pipelines but isn't, a contribution to the [official pipelines](https://github.com/huggingface/diffusers/blob/main/src/diffusers/pipelines) would be even better .
```

- **One-purpose-only**: Pipelines should be used for one task and one task only. Even if two tasks are very similar from a modeling point of view, *e.g.* image2image translation and in-painting, pipelines shall be used for one task only to keep them *easy-to-tweak* and *readable*.

## Examples

### Text-to-Image generation with Stable Diffusion

```python
# make sure you're logged in with `huggingface-cli login`
from torch import autocast
from diffusers import StableDiffusionPipeline, LMSDiscreteScheduler

> lms = LMSDiscreteScheduler(

Author: Good point!

    beta_start=0.00085, 
    beta_end=0.012, 
    beta_schedule="scaled_linear"
)

pipe = StableDiffusionPipeline.from_pretrained(
    "CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4", 
    scheduler=lms,
    use_auth_token=True
)
pipe = pipe.to("cuda")

prompt = "a photo of an astronaut riding a horse on mars"
with autocast("cuda"):
    image = pipe(prompt)["sample"][0]  
    
image.save("astronaut_rides_horse.png")
```

### Image-to-Image text-guided generation with Stable Diffusion

> The `image_to_image.py` script implements `StableDiffusionImg2ImgPipeline`. It lets you pass a text prompt and an initial image to condition the generation of new images. This example also showcases how you can write custom diffusion pipelines using `diffusers`!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `StableDiffusionImg2ImgPipeline` lets you pass a text prompt and an initial image to condition the generation of new images.
```

```python
from torch import autocast
import requests
from PIL import Image
from io import BytesIO

from diffusers import StableDiffusionImg2ImgPipeline

# load the pipeline
device = "cuda"
pipe = StableDiffusionImg2ImgPipeline.from_pretrained(
    "CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4",
    revision="fp16", 
    torch_dtype=torch.float16,
    use_auth_token=True
).to(device)

# let's download an initial image
url = "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/CompVis/stable-diffusion/main/assets/stable-samples/img2img/sketch-mountains-input.jpg"

response = requests.get(url)
init_image = Image.open(BytesIO(response.content)).convert("RGB")
init_image = init_image.resize((768, 512))

prompt = "A fantasy landscape, trending on artstation"

with autocast("cuda"):
    images = pipe(prompt=prompt, init_image=init_image, strength=0.75, guidance_scale=7.5)["sample"]

images[0].save("fantasy_landscape.png")
```
You can also run this example on colab [![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/patil-suraj/Notebooks/blob/master/image_2_image_using_diffusers.ipynb)

### Tweak prompts reusing seeds and latents

> You can generate your own latents to reproduce results, or tweak your prompt on a specific result you liked. [This notebook](stable-diffusion-seeds.ipynb) shows how to do it step by step. You can also run it in Google Colab [![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/pcuenca/diffusers-examples/blob/main/notebooks/stable-diffusion-seeds.ipynb).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can generate your own latents to reproduce results, or tweak your prompt on a specific result you liked. [This notebook](https://github.com/pcuenca/diffusers-examples/blob/main/notebooks/stable-diffusion-seeds.ipynb) shows how to do it step by step. You can also run it in Google Colab [![Open In Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/assets/colab-badge.svg)](https://colab.research.google.com/github/pcuenca/diffusers-examples/blob/main/notebooks/stable-diffusion-seeds.ipynb).
```

Author: Thank you!

### In-painting using Stable Diffusion

> The `inpainting.py` script implements `StableDiffusionInpainPipeline`. This script lets you edit specific parts of an image by providing a mask and text prompt.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The `StableDiffusionInpainPipeline` lets you edit specific parts of an image by providing a mask and text prompt.
```
